---
title: "443 Evans"
---
Room 443 is configured as a Zoom Room.

## Set Up

### TV

Turn on the TV by pressing the **ON** button on the small white button
panel in the corner to the left of the TV. Then press the **Zoom Room**
wall control button. If the TV won't power on, try pressing the button
on the bottom-left underside of the TV.

### Speaker/Microphone

The lights on the device should be blue. Pressing the microphone mute
button will change the lights to red. Adjust the output volume by using
the slider control on the iPad. The input volume is not adjustable.

### iPad

The iPad tablet should be powered on and running the Zoom Room
Controller application.

## Start a Meeting

Turn on the TV if necessary. Tap the **Home** button on the upper-left
side of the iPad. Choose one of the methods below.

### Scheduled Meeting on Room Calendar

If your meeting was added to the room calendar, it will appear in the
column to the left of the meeting control buttons, beneath the day and
time. Tap the **Join Meeting** button next to your meeting.

### Existing Meeting on Personal Calendar

Tap Join and enter the ID and passcode of an existing meeting.

### Instant Meeting

Tap **New Meeting** if you have not scheduled your meeting in advance.
Send the meeting ID and passcode to the meeting participants, or invite
them from within the meeting.

## Share Content

You will need to bring a device to share from.

### Share to the Room Only

From the iPad's Zoom Room main menu, tap Share Content. Visit the
displayed URL to share your screen without starting or joining a
meeting.

### Share to the Room and the Meeting

Meeting participants can use their own devices' Zoom controls to share
their screen. Alternatively, tap the Share Content button on the iPad
when in a meeting to display instructions on both the tablet and room
display. Enable Participant Screen Sharing in the meeting Security
settings.

## Camera Control

Tap Camera Control in a meeting to point, tilt, and/or zoom the camera. 

There are also 3 presets:

- Audience View
- Rear Whiteboard
- Side Whiteboard

## Create Scheduled Meetings on Room Calendar

Scheduled meetings in this room can be joined with one-touch from the
iPad’s left column. To create them:

Create a Google Calendar event and add a Zoom meeting to it with the
[Zoom for Google Workspace
extension](https://workspace.google.com/marketplace/app/zoom_for_google_workspace/364750910244).

Request a [room reservation](https://statistics.berkeley.edu/support/reserve-a-room)
by adding the room to the calendar event.   
