---
title: "Computing Accounts"
---

SCF account holders have access to computing resources, such as a
[network of compute servers and workstations](../servers.md) equipped with [R,
Python, Matlab, and other development environments](../software.md). Please read the
Statistical Computing Facility (SCF) account policies below and the
descriptions of the various account types before submitting your
request.

Once you have an account, please see our [information for new
users](../getting-started.md).

## Policies

Individuals who are issued accounts are responsible for all of its
activity and must not allow anyone else to access it. Files under this
account are not personal property; as such, the SCF reserves the right
to review, modify, or delete any file or terminate any activity that may
interfere with the operations or security of the facility. All files
including email may be automatically deleted when the the account is
closed.

The use of SCF computing resources requires compliance with the
[Berkeley Campus Computer Use
Policy](https://security.berkeley.edu/policy/computer-use-policy) and
the [University of California Electronic Communications Policy
(ECP)](https://security.berkeley.edu/policy/electronic-communications-policy).

These accounts are a privilege and as such can be revoked if misused.
All questions should be addressed to the Systems Manager of the
Statistical Computing Facility in room 499 Evans Hall, 643-7407.

## Account Types

### Faculty  

Faculty accounts are issued to official faculty members of the
department.

### Students  

Student accounts are issued only to students who are currently
registered with UC Berkeley, and are subject to approval. All Statistics
Department graduate students may be issued an account. Department
undergrads, or non-departmental graduate and undergraduate student must
be working with a faculty member to obtain an account. The student
account request form link is at the end of this page.

### Class  

If a course requires computer access, class accounts are typically
issued to individual students by the instructor or GSI. These accounts
are issued in bulk to the instructor or GSI. Course instructors should
[request (Google Form)](http://goo.gl/c8dAn) class accounts a couple of
weeks before the term begins. Students in smaller courses may request an
account directly.

### Visitor  

Visitor accounts are issued to individuals who have been granted
official visitor status as an "associate researcher" while visiting the
UC Berkeley Department of Statistics. Visitor accounts are issued for
the duration of their stay while on campus.

### Research  

Research accounts are issued to individuals who are officially
associated with UC Berkeley or who are associated with a faculty member
or research/lecture member of the Department. Those individuals working
within the UC system on specific research projects which are funded by
grants and/or outside funds in support of research for which this
account is intended, agree to compensate SCF for the resources consumed
according to established SCF rate structures.

### Postdoc  

Postdocs accounts can be issued to those who have a formal affiliation
with the department. The postdoc's sponsoring faculty can establish the
affiliation by making the request of acadpers@stat.berkeley.edu and
paying a small campus fee.

### Project  

[Project accounts](project-accounts.md) are created to
facilitate shared workspaces where multiple people can read and write to
shared data or code. They exist to avoid problems introduced when
relaxing filesystem permissions on one's own account. Please contact
manager@stat.berkeley.edu if you would like to create a project account.
Let us know which local accounts need access and suggest a project
account name.

### Account Closure

Accounts issued to students, alumni, and visitors that are due for
termination will be closed on January 1 and July 1 of each year.
Accounts belonging to currently registered Statistics graduate students
will remain open beyond that date. Individuals having other accounts
must apply for an extension. No extensions are granted for class
accounts.

Alumni accounts are issued upon request to individuals who have left the
Department in good standing and are valid for one year after separation
from the Department. Alumni accounts cannot be renewed.

Faculty, visitor (associate research fellows), and postdoc accounts
expire upon termination of their appointments.

Class accounts will be removed after 3 p.m. of the first Monday after
final exams of the semester for which they were assigned. Be sure to
make any arrangements for permanent or backup storage of your class
account files before the accounts are closed. There will be a \$20 fee
(plus the cost of media) for recovering files from accounts that have
been closed. Upon request, mail messages can be forwarded to another
account for up to 60 days after an account has been closed. (This does
not apply to class accounts.)

## Account Request Form

If you have a CalNet ID, complete our [account request
form](https://scf.berkeley.edu/account).

If you do not have a CalNet ID, please have your sponsor create a
[Sponsored CalNet
Guest](https://calnetweb.berkeley.edu/calnet-departments/calnet-sponsored-guests)
account for you. Visit the [Cirrus Identity
site](https://apps.cirrusidentity.com/console/auth/index) to get
started. Once that is complete you can fill out the account request
form.
