---
title: "How can I install MATLAB on my computer?"
---
Campus has a site license that allows UC Berkeley faculty, researchers,
and students to install and use Matlab on University-owned and
personally-owned devices. Visitors can use MATLAB on University-owned
machines (e.g., our SCF machines) but cannot install it on their own
machines.

If you are NOT affiliated with the Statistics Department, or if you are
in the Statistics Department and are happy to install MATLAB without our
help (you'll have to create a Mathworks account), [Software @
Berkeley](http://software.berkeley.edu/matlab) has instructions.
The [MATLAB
Portal](https://www.mathworks.com/academia/tah-portal/berkeley-731130.html) from
Mathworks provides UC Berkeley faculty, researchers, students, and staff
with self-service access to download and activate MATLAB software,
services, and to view on-demand training materials and tutorials.

If you are affiliated with the Statistics Department and either do not
want to create a Mathworks account or more generally would like help
installing MATLAB on your own machine, please fill out [this
form](https://docs.google.com/a/berkeley.edu/forms/d/18d2v6o1fTvuZql9dHclskCiFJ_DJfPub6TAeXXVo0Z4/viewform)
and we will contact you with details of how to do the installation. If
you do not qualify (e.g., if you are a visitor), but want to purchase
MATLAB personally, you'll need to contact Mathworks directly.

Note that if your computer is maintained by the SCF, it will already
have MATLAB available to you. Additionally, all SCF servers have
MATLAB installed and available for your use.

If you don't qualify for MATLAB on your machine, here are some
alternatives:

- If you do not require specific MATLAB toolboxes, you can install
  [Octave](http://www.gnu.org/software/octave/) on any of your machines
  for free. It can run MATLAB code and has its own set of packages akin
  to MATLAB toolboxes.
- You may want to consider logging into one of our Linux servers and
  running the MATLAB graphical interface remotely via [RDP](/access/remote-desktop).
- We might be able to assist in porting your MATLAB code or work process
  to some other application.

Please contact consult@stat.berkeley.edu if you have any questions or
problems.
